# Reinforcement learning from human feedback

In machine learning, reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) is a technique to align an intelligent agent with human preferences. It involves training a reward model to represent preferences, which can then be used to train other models through reinforcement learning.
In classical reinforcement learning, an intelligent agent's goal is to learn a function that guides its behavior, called a policy. The function is iteratively optimized to increase the reward signal derived from the agent's task performance. However, explicitly defining a reward function that accurately approximates human preferences is challenging. Therefore, RLHF seeks to train a "reward model" directly from human feedback. The reward model is first trained in a supervised manner to predict if a response to a given prompt is good (high reward) or bad (low reward) based on ranking data collected from human annotators. This model then serves as a reward function to improve an agent's policy through an optimization algorithm like proximal policy optimization.
RLHF has applications in various domains in machine learning, including natural language processing tasks such as text summarization and conversational agents, computer vision tasks like text-to-image models, and the development of video game bots. While RLHF is an effective method of training models to act better in accordance with human preferences, it also faces challenges due to the way the human preference data is collected. Though RLHF does not require massive amounts of data to improve performance, sourcing high-quality preference data is still an expensive process. Furthermore, if the data is not carefully collected from a representative sample, the resulting model may exhibit unwanted biases.

In machine learning, reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) is a technique to align an intelligent agent with human preferences. It involves training a reward model to represent preferences, which can then be used to train other models through reinforcement learning.
In classical reinforcement learning, an intelligent agent's goal is to learn a function that guides its behavior, called a policy. The function is iteratively optimized to increase the reward signal derived from the agent's task performance. However, explicitly defining a reward function that accurately approximates human preferences is challenging. Therefore, RLHF seeks to train a "reward model" directly from human feedback. The reward model is first trained in a supervised manner to predict if a response to a given prompt is good (high reward) or bad (low reward) based on ranking data collected from human annotators. This model then serves as a reward function to improve an agent's policy through an optimization algorithm like proximal policy optimization.
RLHF has applications in various domains in machine learning, including natural language processing tasks such as text summarization and conversational agents, computer vision tasks like text-to-image models, and the development of video game bots. While RLHF is an effective method of training models to act better in accordance with human preferences, it also faces challenges due to the way the human preference data is collected. Though RLHF does not require massive amounts of data to improve performance, sourcing high-quality preference data is still an expensive process. Furthermore, if the data is not carefully collected from a representative sample, the resulting model may exhibit unwanted biases.


== Background and motivation ==
Optimizing a model based on human feedback is desirable when a task is difficult to specify yet easy to judge. For example, one may want to train a model to generate safe text that is both helpful and harmless (such as lacking bias, toxicity, or otherwise harmful content). Asking humans to manually create examples of harmless and harmful text would be difficult and time-consuming. However, humans are adept at swiftly assessing and comparing the harmfulness of different AI-generated text. Therefore, a more practical objective would be to allow the model to use this type of human feedback to improve its text generation.
Despite the clear benefits of incorporating human feedback in training models, prior efforts—including some that leverage reinforcement learning (RL)—have encountered significant challenges. Most attempts were either narrow and difficult to generalize, breaking down on more complex tasks, or they faced difficulties learning from sparse (lacking specific information and relating to large amounts of text at a time) or noisy (inconsistently rewarding similar outputs) reward functions.
RLHF was not the first successful method of using human feedback for reinforcement learning, but it is one of the most widely used. The foundation for RLHF was introduced as an attempt to create a general algorithm for learning from a practical amount of human feedback. The algorithm as used today was introduced by OpenAI in a paper on enhancing text continuation or summarization based on human feedback, and it began to gain popularity when the same method was reused in their paper on InstructGPT. RLHF has also been shown to improve the robustness of RL agents and their capacity for exploration, which results in an optimization process more adept at handling uncertainty and efficiently exploring its environment in search of the highest reward.


== Collecting human feedback ==
Human feedback is commonly collected by prompting humans to rank instances of the agent's behavior. These rankings can then be used to score outputs, for example, using the Elo rating system, which is an algorithm for calculating the relative skill levels of players in a game based only on the outcome of each game. While ranking outputs is the most widely adopted form of feedback, recent research has explored other forms, such as numerical feedback, natural language feedback, and prompting for direct edits to the model's output.
One initial motivation of RLHF was that it requires relatively small amounts of comparison data to be effective. It has been shown that a small amount of data can lead to comparable results to a larger amount. In addition, increasing the amount of data tends to be less effective than proportionally increasing the size of the reward model. Nevertheless, a larger and more diverse amount of data can be crucial for tasks where it is important to avoid bias from a partially representative group of annotators.
When learning from human feedback through pairwise comparison under the Bradley–Terry–Luce model (or the Plackett–Luce model for K-wise comparisons over more than two comparisons), the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) for linear reward functions has been show